Using OAuth 2.0 to Access Google APIs



Spark icon
Page Summary
Note: Use of Google's implementation of OAuth 2.0 is governed by the OAuth 2.0 Policies.
Google APIs use the OAuth 2.0 protocol for authentication and authorization. Google supports common OAuth 2.0 scenarios such as those for web server, client-side, installed, and limited-input device applications.

To begin, obtain OAuth 2.0 client credentials from the Google API Console. Then your client application requests an access token from the Google Authorization Server, extracts a token from the response, and sends the token to the Google API that you want to access. For an interactive demonstration of using OAuth 2.0 with Google (including the option to use your own client credentials), experiment with the OAuth 2.0 Playground.

This page gives an overview of the OAuth 2.0 authorization scenarios that Google supports, and provides links to more detailed content. For details about using OAuth 2.0 for authentication, see OpenID Connect.

Note: Given the security implications of getting the implementation correct, we strongly encourage you to use OAuth 2.0 libraries when interacting with Google's OAuth 2.0 endpoints. It is a best practice to use well-debugged code provided by others, and it will help you protect yourself and your users. For more information, see Client libraries.
Basic steps
All applications follow a basic pattern when accessing a Google API using OAuth 2.0. At a high level, you follow five steps:

1. Obtain OAuth 2.0 credentials from the Google API Console.
Visit the Google API Console to obtain OAuth 2.0 credentials such as a client ID and client secret that are known to both Google and your application. The set of values varies based on what type of application you are building. For example, a JavaScript application does not require a secret, but a web server application does.

You must create an OAuth client appropriate for the platform on which your app will run, for example:

androidFor Android apps, use the Android client type.
For iOS and macOS apps, use the iOS client type.
codeFor server-side or JavaScript web apps use the Web application client type. Don't use this client type for any other application, such as native or mobile apps.
grid_viewFor Universal Windows Platform apps, use the Universal Windows Platform (UWP) client type.
chrome_extensionFor Chrome extensions, use the Chrome Extension client type.
tvFor limited input devices, such as TV or embedded devices, use the TVs and Limited Input devices client type.
hostFor server-to-server interactions, use service accounts. No OAuth Client ID is required.
2. Obtain an access token from the Google Authorization Server.
Before your application can access private data using a Google API, it must obtain an access token that grants access to that API. A single access token can grant varying degrees of access to multiple APIs. A variable parameter called scope controls the set of resources and operations that an access token permits. During the access-token request, your application sends one or more values in the scope parameter.

There are several ways to make this request, and they vary based on the type of application you are building. For example, a JavaScript application might request an access token using a browser redirect to Google, while an application installed on a device that has no browser uses web service requests. For more information on how to make the request, see Scenarios and the detailed implementation guides for each app type.

Some requests require an authentication step where the user logs in with their Google account. After logging in, the user is asked whether they are willing to grant one or more permissions that your application is requesting. This process is called user consent.

If the user grants at least one permission, the Google Authorization Server sends your application an access token (or an authorization code that your application can use to obtain an access token) and a list of scopes of access granted by that token. If the user does not grant the permission, the server returns an error.

It is generally a best practice to request scopes incrementally, at the time access is required, rather than up front. For example, an app that wants to support saving an event to a calendar should not request Google Calendar access until the user presses the "Add to Calendar" button; see Incremental authorization.

3. Examine scopes of access granted by the user.
Compare the scopes included in the access token response to the scopes required to access features and functionality of your application dependent upon access to a related Google API. Disable any features of your app unable to function without access to the related API.

The scope included in your request may not match the scope included in your response, even if the user granted all requested scopes. Refer to the documentation for each Google API for the scopes required for access. An API may map multiple scope string values to a single scope of access, returning the same scope string for all values allowed in the request. Example: the Google People API may return a scope of https://www.googleapis.com/auth/contacts when an app requested a user authorize a scope of https://www.google.com/m8/feeds/; the Google People API method people.updateContact requires a granted scope of https://www.googleapis.com/auth/contacts.

4. Send the access token to an API.
After an application obtains an access token, it sends the token to a Google API in an HTTP Authorization request header. It is possible to send tokens as URI query-string parameters, but we don't recommend it, because URI parameters can end up in log files that are not completely secure. Also, it is good REST practice to avoid creating unnecessary URI parameter names.

Access tokens are valid only for the set of operations and resources described in the scope of the token request. For example, if an access token is issued for the Google Calendar API, it does not grant access to the Google Contacts API. You can, however, send that access token to the Google Calendar API multiple times for similar operations.

5. Refresh the access token, if necessary.
Access tokens have limited lifetimes. If your application needs access to a Google API beyond the lifetime of a single access token, it can obtain a refresh token. A refresh token allows your application to obtain new access tokens.

Note: Save refresh tokens in secure long-term storage and continue to use them as long as they remain valid. Limits apply to the number of refresh tokens that are issued per client-user combination, and per user across all clients, and these limits are different. If your application requests enough refresh tokens to go over one of the limits, older refresh tokens stop working.
Scenarios
These scenarios describe how to use OAuth 2.0 to request authorization codes and obtain access and refresh tokens for different types of applications.

Web server applications
The Google OAuth 2.0 endpoint supports web server applications that use languages and frameworks such as PHP, Java, Go, Python, Ruby, and ASP.NET.

The authorization sequence begins when your application redirects a browser to a Google URL; the URL includes query parameters that indicate the type of access being requested. Google handles the user authentication, session selection, and user consent. The result is an authorization code, which the application can exchange for an access token and a refresh token.

The application should store the refresh token for future use and use the access token to access a Google API. Once the access token expires, the application uses the refresh token to obtain a new one.

Your application sends a token request to the Google Authorization Server,
                  receives an authorization code, exchanges the code for a token, and uses the token
                  to call a Google API endpoint.
For details, see Using OAuth 2.0 for Web Server Applications.

Installed applications
The Google OAuth 2.0 endpoint supports applications that are installed on devices such as computers, mobile devices, and tablets. When you create a client ID through the Google API Console, specify that this is an Installed application, then select Android, Chrome Extension, iOS, Universal Windows Platform (UWP), or Desktop app as the application type.

The process results in a client ID and, in some cases, a client secret, which you embed in the source code of your application. (In this context, the client secret is obviously not treated as a secret.)

The authorization sequence begins when your application redirects a browser to a Google URL; the URL includes query parameters that indicate the type of access being requested. Google handles the user authentication, session selection, and user consent. The result is an authorization code, which the application can exchange for an access token. The application should validate the access token before including it in a Google API request. When the token expires, the application repeats the process.

Optionally, a backend server can exchange the authorization code for a refresh token, storing it in a secure location. Once the access token expires, the backend server uses the refresh token to obtain a new one for the application.

Your application sends a token request to the Google Authorization Server,
                  receives an authorization code, exchanges the code for a token, and uses the token
                  to call a Google API endpoint.
For details, see Authorize access to Google user data for Android, and OAuth 2.0 for iOS & Desktop Apps.

Client-side (JavaScript) applications
The Google OAuth 2.0 endpoint supports JavaScript applications that run in a browser.

The authorization sequence begins when your application redirects a browser to a Google URL; the URL includes query parameters that indicate the type of access being requested. Google handles the user authentication, session selection, and user consent.

The result is an access token, which the client should validate before including it in a Google API request. When the token expires, the application repeats the process.

Your JS application sends a token request to the Google Authorization Server,
                  receives a token, validates the token, and uses the token to call a Google API
                  endpoint.
For details, see Using OAuth 2.0 for Client-side Applications.

Applications on limited-input devices
The Google OAuth 2.0 endpoint supports applications that run on limited-input devices such as game consoles, video cameras, and printers.

The authorization sequence begins with the application making a web service request to a Google URL for an authorization code. The response contains several parameters, including a URL and a code that the application shows to the user.

The user obtains the URL and code from the device, then switches to a separate device or computer with richer input capabilities. The user launches a browser, navigates to the specified URL, logs in, and enters the code.

Meanwhile, the application polls a Google URL at a specified interval. After the user approves access, the response from the Google server contains an access token and refresh token. The application should store the refresh token for future use and use the access token to access a Google API. Once the access token expires, the application uses the refresh token to obtain a new one.

The user logs in on a separate device that has a browser
For details, see Using OAuth 2.0 for Devices.

Service accounts
Google APIs such as the Prediction API and Google Cloud Storage can act on behalf of your application without accessing user information. In these situations your application needs to prove its own identity to the API, but no user consent is necessary. Similarly, in enterprise scenarios, your application can request delegated access to some resources.

For these types of server-to-server interactions you need a service account, which is an account that belongs to your application instead of to an individual end-user. Your application calls Google APIs on behalf of the service account, and user consent is not required. (In non-service-account scenarios, your application calls Google APIs on behalf of end-users, and user consent is sometimes required.)

Note: These service-account scenarios require applications to create and cryptographically sign JSON Web Tokens (JWTs). We strongly encourage you to use a library to perform these tasks. If you write this code without using a library that abstracts token creation and signing, you might make errors that would have a severe impact on the security of your application. For a list of libraries that support this scenario, see the service-account documentation.
A service account's credentials, which you obtain from the Google API Console, include a generated email address that is unique, a client ID, and at least one public/private key pair. You use the client ID and one private key to create a signed JWT and construct an access-token request in the appropriate format. Your application then sends the token request to the Google OAuth 2.0 Authorization Server, which returns an access token. The application uses the token to access a Google API. When the token expires, the application repeats the process.

Your server application uses a JWT to request a token from the Google
                    Authorization Server, then uses the token to call a Google API endpoint. No
                    end-user is involved.
For details, see the service-account documentation.

Note: Although you can use service accounts in applications that run from a Google Workspace domain, service accounts are not members of your Google Workspace account and aren't subject to domain policies set by Google Workspace administrators. For example, a policy set in the Google Workspace admin console to restrict the ability of Google Workspace end users to share documents outside of the domain would not apply to service accounts.
Token size
Tokens can vary in size, up to the following limits:

codeAuthorization codes
256 bytes
contextual_tokenAccess tokens
2048 bytes
restore_pageRefresh tokens
512 bytes
Access tokens returned by Google Cloud's Security Token Service API are structured similarly to Google API OAuth 2.0 access tokens but have different token size limits. For details, see the API documentation.

Google reserves the right to change token size within these limits, and your application must support variable token sizes accordingly.

Refresh token expiration
You must write your code to anticipate the possibility that a granted refresh token might no longer work. A refresh token might stop working for one of these reasons:

shield_lockedThe user has revoked your app's access.
The refresh token has not been used for six months.
The user changed passwords and the refresh token contains Gmail scopes.
The user account has exceeded a maximum number of granted (live) refresh tokens.
The user granted time-based access to your app and the access expired.
If an admin set any of the services requested in your app's scopes to Restricted (the error is admin_policy_enforced).
cloud_lockFor Google Cloud Platform APIs - the session length set by the admin could have been exceeded.
A Google Cloud Platform project with an OAuth consent screen configured for an external user type and a publishing status of "Testing" is issued a refresh token expiring in 7 days, unless the only OAuth scopes requested are a subset of name, email address, and user profile (through the userinfo.email, userinfo.profile, openid scopes, or their OpenID Connect equivalents).

There is currently a limit of 100 refresh tokens per Google Account per OAuth 2.0 client ID. If the limit is reached, creating a new refresh token automatically invalidates the oldest refresh token without warning. This limit does not apply to service accounts.

There is also a larger limit on the total number of refresh tokens a user account or service account can have across all clients. Most normal users won't exceed this limit but a developer's account used to test an implementation might.

If you need to authorize multiple programs, machines, or devices, one workaround is to limit the number of clients that you authorize per Google Account to 15 or 20. If you are a Google Workspace admin, you can create additional users with administrative privileges and use them to authorize some of the clients.

Dealing with session control policies for Google Cloud Platform (GCP) organizations 
Administrators of GCP organizations might require frequent reauthentication of users while they access GCP resources, using the Google Cloud session control feature. This policy impacts access to Google Cloud Console, the Google Cloud SDK (also known as the gcloud CLI), and any third party OAuth application that requires the Cloud Platform scope. If a user has a session control policy in place then on the expiry of the session duration, your API calls will error out similar to what would happen if the refresh token was revoked - the call will fail with an error type invalid_grant; the error_subtype field can be used to distinguish between a revoked token and a failure due to a session control policy (for example, "error_subtype": "invalid_rapt"). As session durations can be very limited (between 1 hour to 24 hours), this scenario must be handled gracefully by restarting an auth session.

Equally, you must not use, or encourage the use of, user credentials for server-to-server deployment. If user credentials are deployed on a server for long running jobs or operations and a customer applies session control policies on such users, the server application will fail as there will be no way to re-authenticate the user when the session duration expires.

For more information on how to help your customers deploy this feature, refer to this admin-focused help article.

Client libraries
The following client libraries integrate with popular frameworks, which makes implementing OAuth 2.0 simpler. More features will be added to the libraries over time.